3D printing of microfluidic devices enables rapid, one-step fabrication of complex designs that are typically infeasible to make with traditional MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical Systems) inspired photolithography and replica molding techniques. Printing has been limited with respect to non gas permeable materials thus far. We report the development of 3D printed microfluidic devices for the control of oxygen in cell culture microenvironments. 3D CAD models are designed and printed with microfluidic delivery channels, and then completed by adhering a gas permeable membrane of PDMS (Polydimethylsiloxane) to enable diffusion of gas to the culture area. Two devices are presented: one is a large area (3” diameter) open-well format, and the second is an insert for a standard 24 well plate. Here we demonstrate preliminary oxygen control characterization with two 3D printed prototypes.
Background
Existing methods for fabrication of microdevices rely on MEMS fabrication techniques which have limitations especially for creating complex three-dimensional geometries. In addition MEMS style fabrication involves time consuming and tedious custom fabrication requiring expensive equipment and clean room facilities. Even if the design is realized, successful fabrication typically involves several prototyping iterations and a low success rate. On the other hand, 3D CAD printing allows for unambiguous specifications and nearly eliminates time and effort spent on fabrication. Recently 3D printing has emerged as a method for directly printing complete microfluidic devices (folch, spence, that other one). Printing is currently limited in choice of materials when compared to MEMS style fabrication. As of yet there is no widely available methods or materials to facilitate direct printing of gas permeable materials. (brand new PDMS printing paper?)
Device Design and Fabrication
The 3” petri dish device contains a 500 μm wide channel following a serpentine path leaving 500 um of spacing between channels. The 3D part is printed with the channels embedded in the bottom of the petri dish. A 120 μm thick PDMS membrane is adhered across the channels.
The second device is designed to control gas in 6 wells of a 24 well culture plate from one input, borrowing the working principle of previous work (oppegard). (This is a prototype that is intended to be expanded to control 24 wells)  A distribution network stems from the central input that equalizes the flow along each path length by varying the channel width to the proximal,  intermediate, and distal wells. The device also features a ‘pipe within a pipe’ design so that gas flow enters and leaves the diffusion area in a uniform, and symmetrical flow pattern, demonstrating the capabilities of 3D printing (Fig. #). A PDMS membrane is adhered to the bottom of each pillar.
In both devices the membrane is adhered by allowing a thin spin-coated layer of uncured PDMS on the membrane to cure with the membranes in place. The channels terminate outside of the devices at a barb. Both devices were printed by Fineline Prototyping in Watershed XC. The 2D CAD modeling was started in Autodesk, and the 3D designs were completed in Blender. (cut paragraph?)
Oxygen Characterization
Oxygen was measured in the 3” petri dish device with a commercial fiber-optic probe as 100% nitrogen was flowed through the device. Limitations of the spatial sensitivity of the probe did not allow for measurements at the membrane, or culture surface, explaining the detected 5% oxygen (Fig. #). We are confident that the device is capable of near anoxic conditions although we are unable to verify it with our current tools. (previous two sentences in caption?)
Oxygen was measured in the 6 well device with platinum(II) octaethylporphyrinketone (PtEOPK) polystyrene thin film sensors placed in standing well inserts spaced ~500 μm from the device diffusion membrane. Stern-Volmer analysis was performed on intensity data to reveal oxygen levels during flow of 100% nitrogen in the device. (Fig. #) Although the data presented is N of 1, it demonstrates that the distribution network is delivering gas equally and near anoxic conditions can be achieved. (in caption?)
